---
title: Behind the Lorentz Force
date: 2025-10-27
tags:
- electromagnetism
- quantum mechanics
---

I remember when I first learned about electromagnetism; moving electrons
forming a current inherently creates a magnetic field, but also (more
relevantly here) how a magnetic field can in turn "push" electrons in some
direction. Succinctly:

$$
\vb F = q(\vb v\times \vb B)
$$

But that's high school physics. That's for engineers not physicists. So, where
_exactly_ is this force coming from?

# Fields

Everywhere around us in any arbitrary point of space lies specific values
belonging to any particular field: the electric and magnetic fields come from
the singular electromagnetic field, the temperature field which is just the
power of the low-freq electromagnetic field[^1], the sound/pressure field which
is just a particle density field.

[^1]: see Stefan-Boltzmann relation.

An even extreme example is the metric field, which hold the curvature value of
spacetime at some specific point in space. I brought this up because of an
important fact: the gravitational force does not exist. Not in the traditional
way.

# General Relativity

When you jump and fall back down to the earth, you'd think you're the one
moving up and down; except Einstein didn't. He proposed the fall to be an
illusion, the earth is what's pressing onto you. At ~10 m/s/s.

During that fall, you're inertial. And inertial objects follow one simple rule:
the straight line in spacetime. But spacetime is a hypersurface, so we call
that straight line _'the geodesic'_.

So, am I saying that the Lorentz force isn't real? And that there's a
electromagnetic geodesic? No. The specific case of electromagnetism is much
much more complicated.

# Quantum Electrodynamics

An important part of electromagnetism is how the propagation energy has a
minimum amount to its frequency, i.e., discrete amounts, i.e., quantized, i.e.,
quantum.

$$
\epsilon=\hbar\omega
$$

These "packets" _are_ what make up the entire field
propagation, and materialize as excitations of the field called photons. Since
any energy lower than this can't exist, they present as inherently
probabilistic, i.e., half the minimum energy would exist as a 50% chance of a
single packet.

> At this scale, this probability is what propagates instead!

Now the interesting part, this energy packet effectively becomes some kind of
billiard ball that's transferred between fields all over the place. When
charges move, they emit electromagnetic excitations that come in
quantized/discrete amounts. Magnetic fields are also just charges that move but
in some other reference frame.

Hence, when they move in vicinity, this energy starts to "ricochet" between the
two, forming a standing wave. This causes the positional probability of the
charge to be focused in a trajectory that follows Lorentz's law!

# Rebuttals

Wait- this could've been explained without quantum mechanics. And definitely
without relativity. Why the hassle? These are very valid concerns in general.
One should always accept the easiest explanation before unnecessarily diving
too deep[^2].

[^2]: see Occam's razor.

The distinction is important when we realize that the true trajectory of the
charge is _not definite_. To measure them in the first place, one would need to
interfere, like maybe, placing a metallic plate and measuring the potential
generated. The needle would indeed fluctuate akin to a radioactive gauge. Each
"hit" corresponds to the collapse of a charge's wavefunction.

But what about plasma? We clearly see the bright curves following protons and
electrons in a [tokamak](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tokamak). Those bright
lines aren't the protons, they're photons that are also following a
probabilistic trajectory all the way to your eye retina (or a camera sensor)
which act as the metallic plate, collapsing the photon wavefunction.

# Conclusion

So, what have we gained? What can we do with this information? Honestly, not
much. Current tech is pretty limited to expand on this. Most if not all
innovation today is focused on clear cut profit, no room for loss:
semiconductors, materials, optical fibers. I would love it if people cared
a bit more about intrinsic particles and manipulation thereof; but that's too
much to expect from the collective.
